## Sarabande in C minor, BWV 1011 (for piano)

Everything I know about transcribing music for the piano is owed to Leopold Godowsky. His 53 transcriptions of Chopin's etudes are probably his most well-known body of work, but equally monumental and inventive are his Bach transcriptions of three violin sonatas/partitas (BWVs 1001-1003) and three cello suites (BWVs 1008, 1009, 1011). The sparser and more chromatic source material -- none more so than the haunting C minor sarabande -- is fertile ground for Godowsky's trademark penchant for adding counter-melodies and harmonizations. At the same time, the texture of the piano writing is essentially baroque, and I couldn't help but hypothesize about an alternate treatment of the C minor sarabande with more of the late-Romantic chromaticism and gnarly figurations seen in his left-hand-only transcription of Chopin's op. 10/6 E-flat minor etude. That hypothesizing became this.

Right off the bat, there is a tension between the limited range of baroque cello writing (barely over two octaves) and the much greater range stylistic of late-Romantic piano writing, particularly when set for the left hand only, which somewhat imposes the constraint of hand size. To keep things interesting, both of the repeats are written out, which gave me the opportunity to shift half the material up an octave, and to write different harmonizations for each pass. This also allowed me to structure the emotional arc a bit unconventionally, with a climax on an unstable half-diminished chord in the last bar of the piece. The repeat of this section then dissipates the climax, briefly visiting a distant C-flat major before the expected cadence returns to the tonic.
